History of Curry
Indian musician playing a sita

Curry comes from the South Indian word Kari meaning sauce. Seeing as about half a million curries are eaten in the UK every day, they have become a traditional meal. However, some curries in this instance bear no relation to the meals produced in India. For example Chicken Tikka Massala is an English recipe and is only just becoming popular in the Asian sub-continent.

Curries come from various Asian countries including India, Sri Lanka (Ceylon), Myanmar (Burma), Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia.

Curries differ greatly in their taste and content, not only between countries but also within countries. For example, the curries of India are different than those of Malaysia and Indonesia and in India the curry cuisine in the north is not the same as that in southern India . In addition there is the chef factor. No two cooks make identical meals. Every good cook has his or her own special style and adds that individual touch to a meal.

Essentially a curry is a spicy recipe but the way the types of spices and herbs are used differs considerably from country to country. Not all curries are hot. In fact there are more mild curry recipes than hot ones and these are designed to give a cleverly balanced blend of the various spices and herbs used, some of which have delicate and highly sophisticated tastes.

In Indian cooking, for example, this contrast is demonstrated in the difference between the hot vindaloo and Madras curries and the mild kormas. Generally speaking, commonly used base spices and herbs include coriander, cumin, cardamom and tumeric, especially in India . Depending on the recipe involved, other items can include things like chilli, curry leaves, garlic, ginger, garam masala, onions, lemon grass, cinnamon and pepper and mustard seeds.

Indian musician playing a sita

Chicken Tikka Massala
The tikka massala curry is made with Tikka meat. That is, meat that has been marinated and cooked on skewers in a Tandoor before being used in the curry preparation.
The Massala is the curry sauce that the tikka is served in. It is a creamy mild and colourful dish, often appearing day-glow red due to the addition of artificial food colouring.

Quote from Robin Cook (April 2001)
"Chicken Tikka Massala is now a true British national dish, not only because it is the most popular, but because it is a perfect illustration of the way Britain absorbs and adapts external influences. Chicken Tikka is an Indian dish. The Massala sauce was added to satisfy the desire of British people to have their meat served in gravy."